Exercise 2 - Random Prime Number Generation
=================================

Intro
-----

Error handling is essential for any programmer. Being able to understand error messages
and apply accurate fixes in a timely manner is vital for mental health. Unfortunately, Python's stacktrace does not
always give a clear picture on everything that can go wrong...

Working Through an Example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Let's go through an example where we create a function to identify prime numbers and generate random numbers until we
find a prime number validated through our function.

Exercise
""""""""

Take a look at the example in ``random_prime_number.py``: do you see any errors in the code?
Take a guess, and then confirm by running the program. Does it work as you expected? If not, is it obvious
why your program is not running properly?

Expectations vs Reality
"""""""""""""""""""""""

Ideally, error handling allows a quick solution to become apparent, but sometimes we get no feedback at all.
In this case, we accidentally entered an infinite while loop! But where in the program did we go wrong? Why does
the ``prime`` variable never evaluate to true? Does the logic in the function ``is_prime`` work correctly, or is the
error somewhere else?


Since the code enters an infinite loop, there is never an error stack trace. This can lead to a lot of
confusion and no information as to where the error occurred. We're here to see if there is a better way to debug
your infinite while loop.



Challenge
"""""""""

Experiment with ``pystack`` to determine where you need to fix your code. Look at what functions may help you evaluate
the errors in your code without stacktrace. Use the ``pystack`` functionality while the code is still running and
see if you can fix the error.

.. raw:: html

   <details>
   <summary><i>Hint 1</i></summary>

Check to your local variables using ``pystack``.

.. raw:: html

   </details>

.. raw:: html

   <details>
   <summary><i>Hint 2</i></summary>

Try the following command while your program is running: ``pystack remote --locals {PID}``.

.. raw:: html

   </details>

Solutions
"""""""""

.. raw:: html

   <details>
   <summary><i>Toggle to see the solution</i></summary>

After using ``pystack`` you can now see that we accidentally used the wrong random function!
In our current implementation, ``random.random()`` only returns floats between [0.0, 1.0). This shows
that while our ``is_prime`` function has correct logic, the function will never get passed a prime number.

A quick fix is to replace the random function with ``random.randint(0, 100000)``. With this quick fix, our
program will now generate random prime numbers!



Full code solution `here
<https://github.com/bloomberg/pystack/blob/main/docs/tutorials/solutions/exercise_2/random_prime_number.py>`_.

.. raw:: html

   </details>

Conclusion
^^^^^^^^^^

Sometimes, finding the bug in your code is not as simple as looking at a stacktrace. Infinite loops
are common logical errors in programs, but can be difficult to find. Instead of spending excess time
searching through long lines of code, using ``pystack`` can help these logical errors be easier to
find.
